# Contemporary Issues In Data

## Article 1 

In Wired's [Workers Are Trading Staggering Amounts of Data for 'Payday Loans'](https://www.wired.com/story/payday-loan-data/), Caitlin Harrington discusses how paycheck advance services are trading worker data for cash advances. The pandemic and other factors have increased the amount of fast cash needed by many to pay bills on time if they are laid off or their paycheck doesn't arrive on time. Paychex, the service one worker named Dave Tulloch signed up for, sends his data to a company called Argyle - just one company in an industry worth $12 billion. Argyle collects up to 140 data points on workers, builds secure connections between Paychex and busieness that want to access the data, and transfers data for a fee per customer and an additonal monthly charge for monitoring. Harrington first notes that the the direct access to payroll accounts can lower risk for lenders and consequently, lower interest rates: "It provides alternatives for immigrants without credit scores and gig workers who struggle to qualify for credit due to variabel earnings and multiple income streams" (Harrington). Users can build credit through these payday services separate from traditional avenues. Harrington also notes that the data can be used to characterize workers identities beyond just their economic payroll; looking at their hours worked, level of success at work, and reputation can be used against workers if data is sold to bad lenders who offer predatory loans. 

I think Harrington does a good job of showing the pros and cons of collecting and sharing worker's payroll data. I assumed this article would be purely negative, but Harrington showed why collecting this data can help marginalized and poorer workers get better interest rates and establish credit - an important asset for any individual to have in our modern world. Nevertheless, regulation and oversight need to be implemented into these private companies if possible to protect workers from bad characters who aim to make money off of individuals who are already commonly short on cash. Payday loans and similar services usually have a bad connotation with a strong mentality that these services only exist to keep poor individuals poor. But Harrington has shown me that there will always be a demand for payday advances and if done properly and ethically, it can benefit workers and actually help them economically progress (by estabilshing strong credit). Events like the pandemic further emphasize why these services are essential in our society; hopefully we can continue to use big data to make these services better society for everyone, especially those who need help the most. 

## Article 2

In Wired's ['Worker Data Science' Can Teach Us How to fix the Gig Economy](https://www.wired.com/story/labor-organizing-unions-worker-algorithms/), Karen Gregory shows how data on gig workers can be utilized to the benefit of the workers themselves - a similar story to that of Harrington with a slightly different perspective. Gregory focuses on the struggle for gig workers to earn the same rights as traditional workers, and how they must combine their traditional methods of leverage (i.e. unions) with the reclamation of their data from the large companies they work with to better their working conditions and quality of life. Gregory points out that in certain countries like the UK, individual workers have the right to request both their personal data and how its used by the platforms they work for. Uber drivers in London have utilized the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) to aggregate their own data in a worker-owned data trust. This pooling of data helps fight challenges from Uber itself like unfair terminations and dismisals and to raise issues and identify biases with automated technologies like facial recognition technologies.

I think Gregory does a good job of creating a call-to-action, not just identifying a problem or examples of specific solutions. Gig workers exist in almost all countries in our modern, globalized world and they should work with governments to protect themselves from and gain leverage against the companies they work for - not because these companies are inherently bad, but because they have a commitment to shareholders over the gig workers. I also think workers of all kinds knowing more about their own personal data is going to revolutionize how we work. Armed with this information, we can recognize our habits and possibly change. Moreover, when worker data is pooled together, individuals gain leverage against the companies and organizations they work for. I just started recently using ADP for payroll at a job I started this semester and its great how I can see everything pertaining to my payroll all in one portal (in contrast to my old job where I only got a paper paycheck). As big tech companies continue to take up more market share in our job force, making sure workers are protected in everyway is essential. Data is our biggest tool against the big tech. They use our data - why shouldn't.